Separate SQL design documents and documentation (#22712)
hazelcast/hazelcast: docs/sql/02-type-system.md

# SQL Type System

## Overview

The type system defines how objects of different types interact with each other in the Hazelcast Mustang engine.
The type system is defined by the list of supported types, type mapping, and type conversion rules.

A type is defined by name, precedence, precision, and scale.

- **Name** is a textual representation of type name
- **Precision** is the total count of significant digits in the whole number, applicable to **numeric types**
- **Precedence** is a comparable value that is used for type inference in expressions. A type with a
  higher value has precedence over a type with a lower value. If two types have the same precedence value, then
  the type with higher precision has precedence.

**Type family** is a collection of types with the same name, but different precisions. All types
within a family have the same name and precedence. For example, `INTEGER(11)` and `INTEGER(12)` are two types
from the same `INTEGER` family.

The scale is not used in Hazelcast Mustang. It is applicable only for `DECIMAL`, `REAL`, and `DOUBLE` types.
Instead of defining it as a separate value, we just treat these types as types with infinite scale.

> ## 1 Supported Types

Reviewer: entire chapter misses `JSON` mapped to `HazelcastJsonValue`

Author: Good catch, I guess, it's a point for a separate PR.

Reviewer: maybe better to do it in this PR, because you already added JSON to the big table, but without conversions to VARCHAR

> Types supported by the Hazelcast Mustang are listed in Table 1. Precision is the smallest precision in the type family.

Author: ```suggestion
Types supported by the Hazelcast Mustang are listed in Table 1.
```

| `NULL`                     | 0          |           |
| `VARCHAR`                  | 100        |           |
| `BOOLEAN`                  | 200        | 1         |
| `TINYINT`                  | 300        | 4         |
| `SMALLINT`                 | 400        | 7         |
| `INTEGER`                  | 500        | 11        |
| `BIGINT`                   | 600        | 20        |
| `DECIMAL`                  | 700        | Unlimited |
| `REAL`                     | 800        | Unlimited |
| `DOUBLE`                   | 900        | Unlimited |
| `TIME`                     | 1000       |           |
| `DATE`                     | 1100       |           |
| `TIMESTAMP`                | 1200       |           |
| `TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE` | 1300       |           |
| `OBJECT`                   | 1400       |           |

The type `TIME WITH TIME ZONE` is not supported because of its confusing behavior: daylight-saving rules make it hard to reason
about time with offset without date part. For this reason, this type is of little use for real applications. The support for this
type might be added in future releases if we find useful use cases for it.

> Structured and UDF data types are not supported at the moment. The support for these types will be added in future releases.

Reviewer: what do you mean by "UDF data types"? In context of SQL "UDF" = user defined function.

```suggestion
Structured and user-defined data types are not supported at the moment. The support for these types may be added in future releases.
```

Reviewer: user defined types support in SQL is experimental: https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.2/sql/user-defined-types

For example, an input value of the type `java.math.BigInteger` is mapped to `DECIMAL` SQL type. But since `DECIMAL`
type is mapped to `java.math.BigDecimal`, the input value is converted from `java.math.BigInteger` to `java.math.BigDecimal`
on first access.

### 2.1 SQL to Java Mapping

Table 2 establishes a strict one-to-one mapping between SQL and Java types.

*Table 2: SQL-to-Java mapping*

| SQL Type          | Java Type                  |
|-------------------|----------------------------|
| `NULL`            | `java.lang.Void`           |
| `VARCHAR`         | `java.lang.String`         |
| `BOOLEAN`         | `java.lang.Boolean`        |
| `TINYINT`         | `java.lang.Byte`           |
| `SMALLINT`        | `java.lang.Short`          |
| `INTEGER`         | `java.lang.Integer`        |
| `BIGINT`          | `java.lang.Long`           |
| `DECIMAL`         | `java.math.BigDecimal`     |
| `REAL`            | `java.lang.Float`          |
| `DOUBLE`          | `java.lang.Double`         |
| `DATE`            | `java.time.LocalDate`      |
| `TIME`            | `java.time.LocalTime`      |
| `TIMESTAMP`       | `java.time.LocalDateTime`  |

> | `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` | `java.time.OffsetDateTime` |

Reviewer: why use shortcut?

```suggestion
| `TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE` | `java.time.OffsetDateTime` |
```

displacement, so full zone information from the `java.time.ZonedDateTime` class is not needed.

### 2.2 Java to SQL Mapping

Table 3 establishes a many-to-one mapping between Java and SQL types.

*Table 3: Java-to-SQL mapping*

| Java Type                  | SQL Type          |
|----------------------------|-------------------|
| `java.lang.Void`           | `NULL`            |
| `java.lang.String`         | `VARCHAR`         |
| `java.lang.Character`      | `VARCHAR`         |
| `java.lang.Boolean`        | `BOOLEAN`         |
| `java.lang.Byte`           | `TINYINT`         |
| `java.lang.Short`          | `SMALLINT`        |
| `java.lang.Integer`        | `INTEGER`         |
| `java.lang.Long`           | `BIGINT`          |
| `java.math.BigInteger`     | `DECIMAL`         |
| `java.math.BigDecimal`     | `DECIMAL`         |
| `java.lang.Float`          | `REAL`            |
| `java.lang.Double`         | `DOUBLE`          |
| `java.time.LocalDate`      | `DATE`            |
| `java.time.LocalTime`      | `TIME`            |
| `java.time.LocalDateTime`  | `TIMESTAMP`       |
| `java.util.Calendar`       | `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` |

> | `java.util.Date`           | `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` |

Reviewer: the same as above: why use shortcut? I believe `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` is not valid SQL

| `java.time.Instant`        | `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` |
| `java.time.OffsetDateTime` | `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` |
| `java.time.ZonedDateTime`  | `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` |
| Any other type             | `OBJECT`          |

The following SQL types are mapped to several Java types:

- `VARCHAR` is mapped to `java.lang.String` and `java.lang.Character`
- `DECIMAL` is mapped to `java.math.BigInteger` and `java.math.BigDecimal`
- `TIMESTAMP W/ TZ` is mapped to multiple date/time classes which represent a time instant.

## 3. Type Conversions

Different types might be converted to each other. The table provides the list of type conversions.

> *Table 4: Type conversions (I - implicit, E - explicit)*

Reviewer: * legend does not match the table which contains `Y`.
* I think there are different rules for operators (and row conversions) and different for functions, and maybe also different for dynamic parameters
* lack of JSON (which is tricky and changed in #22746)
